Abdominal Muscles 
The large group of muscles that assists in the regular breathing movement and supports the muscles of the spine while lifting and keeps other abdominal organs and intestines in place. 

Achilles Tendon 
One of the longest tendons in the body, it attaches the calf muscles to the heel bone. 

Acute Episode 
The period of time when an injury is at its worst, usually right after the injury or flare-up has occurred. 

Aerobic Exercise 
Brisk exercise which promotes circulation of oxygen through the blood. 

AIDS 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, which is caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 

Allergens 
Airborne irritants that trigger the release of histamine, a body chemical. 

Altered Immune Response 
A reaction or change of the immune system as a result of an allergen or irritant. 

Amniocentesis 
Medical process to remove a small amount of amniotic fluid through the abdomen. Amniocentesis is done to detect certain birth defects. 

Amniotic Fluid 
The fluid that surrounds the fetus in the amniotic sac. 

Amniotic Sac 
Membranes which contain the fetus and the amniotic fluid. The amniotic sac and the amniotic fluid are often refereed to as the "bag of waters." 

Anemic 
(Anemia) A condition involving the deficiency of the oxygen-carrying red blood cells. 

Anesthesia 
Chemical substance given to a patient to produce loss of sensation, with or without unconsciousness. 

Anti-Coagulants 
Drugs used to treat and prevent abnormal blood clotting. 

Antibiotics 
Prescription drugs that kill bacteria. 

Antibodies 
Protein produced by white blood cells which neutralize or destroy foreign proteins in the body (antigens). When infected with virus or bacteria, the body produces antibodies, which destroy the invading microorganisms. 

Antihistamine 
Drug used to offset the effects of histamine. 

Areola 
The pigmented area that surrounds the nipple of the breast. 

Asthma 
A condition where the airways are inflamed and obstructed, causing a person to have difficulty breathing. 

Atopic Dermatitis 
The medical term for eczema. It is a skin disorder sometimes found in people with allergies. It is a very itchy, red, scaly rash that may ooze a clear fluid. 

Bacterial Infection 
An infection caused by bacteria (micro-organisms which attack the immune system). Bacterial infections can be treated with antibiotics. 

Bag of Waters 
A lay person's term for the amniotic sac and amniotic fluid. 

Beta-Blockers 
Prescribed to treat heart disorders and high blood pressure, this group of drugs is also known as Beta-adrenergic blocking agents. 

Blood Pressure 
The pressure of the blood in the main arteries which rises and falls as the muscles of the body cope with varying demands (e.g. exercise, stress, sleep). There are two types of pressures that are measured: 
1) systolic pressure, created by the contraction of the heart muscle, and
2) diastolic pressure, when the heart is at rest between beats. 

Blood Vessels 
Tubular canals through which blood pass. Examples are arteries, veins, or capillaries. 

Brachial Artery 
An artery on the inside of the arm, midway between the elbow and the shoulder, which carries blood away from the heart. 

Calcium 
A mineral needed for strong bones, which is found primarily in dairy products. 

Carotid Artery 
An artery in the neck carrying blood from the heart to the brain. 

Cerebrovascular Disease 
A disease which affects an artery's ability to supply blood to the brain. 

Cervical Cancer 
Cancer of the cervix. 

Cervix 
Mouth of the uterus (womb). In the first stage of labor, the cervix thins and opens to allow the baby to move into the vagina (birth canal). 

Cesarean Birth 
Delivery of the baby through an incision in the abdomen and uterine walls (also called C-section). 

Chemotherapy 
The use of drugs to treat cancers. The drugs sometimes impair normal tissues as well. 

Chlamydia 
A group of bacterial microorganisms that causes various infectious diseases in humans. It is the most common sexually transmitted disease in the U.S. It can be treated with antibiotics. 

Chromosomes 
Found in the nuclei of cells, chromosomes contain genetic information that determine the hereditary characteristics of offspring. 

Chronic Illness 
A set of symptoms or disorders that has persisted for a long period of time. It is a continuing disease process with progressive deterioration. 

Circumcision 
Surgery which removes the foreskin of the penis. 

Colorectal Cancer 
Cancer in the large intestine. 

Colorectal Screening 
A test performed by a clinician to detect colorectal cancer. 

Colostrum 
A sticky yellowish or whitish fluid secreted by the breasts during mid to late pregnancy and for several days after birth before the breast milk comes in. 

Compresses 
A material, such as cloth, applied under pressure to an area of skin and held in place for a period of time. A compress can be cold, hot, moist, or dry. 

Constipation 
The inability to pass bowel movements easily. 

Contractions 
The tightening and shortening of the uterine muscles. During labor, contractions cause dialation and thinning of the cervix and aid in the descent of the baby into the birth canal. 

Cough Suppressant 
A drug used to control a dry, nagging cough. 

Danders 
Minute scales shed from human or other animal skin or hair. These scales float in the air or settle on a surface and make up the majority of household dust. 

Decongestants 
Drugs used to relieve nasal congestion as occurs during upper respiratory infections. 

Dehydration 
Dehydration occurs when a person's body water content has decreased to a dangerously low level. Water accounts for 60% of a man's weight and 50% of a woman's. 

Diabetes 
A condition where the pancreas produces insufficient or no insulin, a hormone which controls sugar levels in the blood. Without insulin, the blood cannot absorb sugar into cells for energy and into liver and fat cells for storage. 

Dilating 
The opening of the cervix caused by uterine contractions. 

Diphtheria 
A serious bacterial infection which causes a sore throat and fever and may lead to further complications or fatal diseases. Diphtheria is extremely rare in the United States due to the virtually 100% effective immunization rate. 

Discharge 
Flow of fluid from a body cavity such as the nose, vagina, or nipple. 

Diuretic 
Drug or ingested food that helps remove excess water from the body by increasing the amount lost in the urine. 

Douche 
A stream of water applied to the vagina for cleansing purposes. 

Down's Syndrome 
A disorder caused by an extra chromosome of the genes causing mental and physical developmental disabilities in the offspring. 

Due Date 
The estimated calendar date when a baby will be born. It is also called the estimated date of confinement (E.D.C.) 

Eczema 
An inflammation of the skin causing itching. It is often accompanied by scaling or blisters and is sometimes caused by an allergy. 

Effacement 
The thinning of the cervix which occurs before or during dilation. 

Embryo 
Term used for the baby during the first 8 weeks of life in the uterus. 

Emphysema 
A disease in the lungs in which the alveoli (tiny air sacs) become damaged, usually due to smoking. 

Epidural Anesthetic 
An injection of an anesthetic into the epidural space surrounding the fluid-filled sac around the spine. It partially numbs the abdomen and legs. 

Episiotomy 
An incision of the perineum made near the end of labor, when the baby's head is showing, to enlarge the vaginal opening. 

Esophagus 
The tube through which food passes from the mouth to the stomach. 

Estimated date of confinement (EDC) 
The due date or estimated calendar date when a baby will be born. 

Evaporation 
A method to draw moisture out of the skin. 

Fasting Plasma Glucose 
A test for sugar levels obtained from blood samples taken after an overnight fast. 

Fetal Movement 
Movement of the fetus in the womb. 

Fetus 
Term for an unborn baby from the end of the 8th week after conception until birth. 

First Stage of Labor 
The part of labor when the cervix dilates to 10 centimeters. 

Forceps 
An instrument used to aid in vaginal delivery. 

Foreskin 
The fold of skin which covers the head of a penis. 

Frostbite 
Damage to the tissues from exposure to temperature below 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees C). An initial pins and needles sensation is followed by numbness. After that, the skin appears white, cold and hard, and finally becomes red and swollen. 

Fundus 
The top part of the uterus. 

Gastrointestinal 
(Gastrointestinal tract) Parts of the digestive system that include the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small and large intestines, rectum and anus (excluding the liver, gall bladder, and pancreas). 

Genital 
(Genitalia) The male and female reproductive organs, primarily the external sex organs. 

Gestation 
The length of time a developing baby is carried in the uterus after conception, usually about 40 weeks. 

Gestational Diabetes 
A diabetic condition which occurs during pregnancy and often goes away after the baby's birth. 

Glands 
Glands are groups of cells. "Glands" generally refer to secreting glands and lymph nodes. Secreting glands manufacture and release chemical substances such as hormones and enzymes. Lymph nodes play an important part in fighting infections. 

Glaucoma 
A condition where abnormally high pressure of the fluid in the eye causes damage. 

Gonorrhea 
A contagious bacterial infection spread through sexual contact, including vaginal, oral or anal sex. Also called "the clap," it is one of the most common infectious diseases in the world. It is treated with antibiotics. 

Hamstring 
Muscles located at the back of the thigh that bend the knee and swing the leg backward from the hip. 

Hay Fever 
The popular name for runny nose or allergic rhinitis. An allergic reaction of the immune system upon exposure to foreign substances. 

HDL 
(High-density lipoprotein) A high-density lipoprotein which removes excess cholesterol from the bloodstream. 

Heart Murmur 
Heard through a physician's stethoscope, it is the sound of turbulent blood passing through the heart. Heart murmurs are possible indications of abnormal blood flow and may be caused by a disorder of a heart valve (structure which opens to allow blood to flow away from the heart, and closes to prevent back flow into the heart). Many murmers are benign (of no significance). 

Heartburn 
A burning sensation in the esophagus due to stomach acids backing up into the lower esophagus. 

Hemolytic Disease 
Hemolytic disease of the newborn is a condition in which an excessive number of red blood cells in the fetus are destroyed by the mother's antibodies. It is typically caused by Rh incompatibility. 

Hemorrhoids 
Inflammation of the veins surrounding the anus. 

Hepatitis 
Inflammation of the liver, often caused by a virus. 

Hepatitis B 
(Hepatitis, Type B) A viral infection which attacks the liver and causes inflammation. Hepatitis B is primarily transmitted sexually, however, it may be spread by exchange of blood (e.g. by needle sharing with drug users, razor sharing, or blood transfusions which occurred prior to 1985 when tests for the virus became available). 

Hepatitis B Vaccine 
A immunization performed primarily by a needle injection which creates antibodies to fight the Hepatitis B virus if the virus later enters the body. 

Herpes 
Small, painful blisters that erupt on the skin. The herpes simplex virus causes painful blisters around the lips, and genital herpes causes blisters on the sex organs. 

High Blood Pressure 
A condition forcing your heart to pump blood through your circulatory system at a force much greater than is necessary to maintain a steady flow. Known also as hypertension. 

Histamine 
A chemical present in cells throughout the body that is released during an allergic reaction. 

HIV 
(Human Immunodeficiency Virus) A virus which can destroy the immune system and lead to AIDS. 

Hoarseness 
Interference of the normal working of the vocal cords in the larynx (voice box) resulting in a rough, husky, or croaking voice. 

Hormone 
A chemical substance produced by a gland or organ. 

Humidifier 
A machine that adds moisture to the air to prevent dryness in the mouth, nose, and throat. 

Hypersensitivity 
The over-reaction of the immune system to an irritant. 

Hypertension 
Abnormally high blood pressure. 

Hysterectomy 
A method where the abdomen is surgically opened to remove part or all of the uterus. 

Immune System 
An inborn collection of cells and proteins which work to protect against infectious micro-organisms in the body. 

Incompetent Cervix 
A cervix which begins to dilate prematurely, usually in the second trimester. 

Influenza 
Commonly called "the flu", influenza is a virus that infects the respiratory tract and may cause fever, headache, and general body aches, runny nose, sore throat, or cough. 

Insulin 
A hormone which promotes the transfer of sugar into the body cells for energy production. 

Intestines 
The major part of the digestive track forming a long tube divided into two main sections: the small intestine and the large intestine, extending to the anus. 

Intravenous 
Fluid providing nutrition, water or medication injected into a vein. 

Inversion 
Retraction of the nipple. (Inverted nipple) 

Jaundice 
A yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes usually caused by diseases of the liver or bile ducts. 

Labor 
Contractions of the uterus which cause the cervix to thin and dilate, and the baby to descend into the birth canal and to be pushed out of the vagina. 

Laryngitis 
An inflammation of the larynx (voice box) usually caused by infection and resulting in hoarseness. 

Lesions 
A broad term for an abnormality of the body which can be either an infection, abscess (an open, fluid filled sore), wound, or tumor. 

Let Down 
The let down reflex is an involuntary reflex during breastfeeding which causes the milk to flow freely. 

Ligaments 
Fibrous, slightly elastic tissue which binds the bones together and prevents excessive movement of the joint. 

Lightening 
Term used to define when the baby and uterus drops down into the pelvis (usually two to three weeks before birth). 

Low Placenta 
(Placenta Previa) The location of the placenta in the lower part of the uterus which may partially or completely cover the cervix. 

Mammogram 
A form of breast xray used to detect breast cancer. Mammography is extremely safe as it uses low amounts of radiation. 

Meconium 
The baby's first stool which forms in the large intestine while the baby is in the uterus. It has a dark green or black tar-like appearance. 

Membranes 
In pregnancy, membranes are layers of tissue which comprise the amniotic sac. 

Menopause 
Menopause occurs when the production of female hormones, (estrogen and progesterone) is reduced, resulting in physical and psychological changes. This usually occurs between the ages of 45 and 55. 

Microorganisms 
Single-celled living organisms too small to be seen by the naked eye. Some microorganisms cause infections. 

Miscarriage 
A spontaneous abortion. 

Monamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
Drugs used to fight depression. 

Muscles 
Bundles of specialized cells that can contract and relax to create movement for the body itself and the organs within it. 

Nerves 
Bundle of nerve fibers that carry information back and forth in the body, usually to and from the brain or spinal cord. 

Obese 
Obesity occurs when a person has too much body fat. Obesity is not the same as being overweight; a person is considered obese when they weigh 20% or more of the maximum desirable weight for their height. 

Obstructive Lung Disease 
A condition in which there is a persistent disruption of air flow into and out of the lungs. 

Organism 
A generic word for any living species, animal or plant. 

Ovaries 
Reproductive glands in females. 

Pap Smear 
A process in which a clinician inserts a speculum into the vagina to gather cells from the cervix to test for cancer. 

Pelvic Examination 
An exam by a clinician which includes a Pap Smear, a genital exam and a manual exam. During pregnancy, it is performed to measure the size of the uterus and pelvis. 

Pelvis 
The ring of bones that link the spine and hip bones, and protects abdominal organs such as the uterus in women. 

Perineum 
The area that lies between the vagina and anus in women. 

Placenta 
The organ which exchanges oxygen, nutrients, and waste between mother and fetus. 

Pneumococcal Vaccine 
A vaccine which protects against S. Pnemoniae (a bacteria that causes pneumonia). 

Postpartum 
A period of time following childbirth. 

Presenting Part 
The part of the fetus which is closest to the cervix at time of birth. 

Productive Cough 
A cough in which phlegm or mucus is dislodged, enabling a person to clear mucus from the lungs. 

Prostate gland 
A chestnut shaped organ in males which resides below the bladder and in front of the rectum. The prostate gland produces most of the seminal fluid (the fluid that carries the semen during ejaculation). 

Protein 
Molecules that are made of amino acids. They are found all living organisms and are essential for the growth and repair of animal tissue. Proteins are needed in the diet; they are broken down into amino acids which are absorbed, and rebuilt to form new proteins in the body. 

Quickening 
The first fetal movements felt by the mother during pregnancy. This occurs usually between 18 and 22 weeks of pregnancy. 

Radial Artery 
One of the main arteries of the arm, running down its full length into the hand. Arteries carry blood away from the heart. 

Rash 
A group of spots on an area of inflamed skin. 

Relaxin 
A hormone produced during pregnancy which relaxes the pelvic ligaments and other joints in the body. 

Rh Factor 
A blood factor located in red blood cells. Eighty-five percent of the population carry the blood factor and are Rh positive. Fifteen percent are missing the factor from their blood cells and are Rh negative. 

Rubella 
(German measles) A viral infection which is dangerous to the fetus of pregnant women as it may cause various birth defects. 

Ruptured Membranes 
A leak or breakage in the amniotic sac (bag of waters) resulting in a steady flow of clear, pink, or greenish-brown fluid from the vagina. 

Saliva 
The watery fluid secreted into the mouth by the salivary glands that are in the mouth. It keeps the mouth moist, lubricates food to aid in swallowing, makes it possible to taste food, and contains digestive enzyme (a protein that begins the breakdown of food). 

Scar Tissue 
A mark left on damaged tissue after it has healed. It can form on the skin or on internal wounds. 

Shock 
A condition that may occur after a severe injury which results in a dangerous reduction of blood flow throughout the body tissues. If untreated, shock could lead to coma and death. 

Sickle Cell Anemia 
An inherited disorder of red blood cells with sever anemia. 

Sickle Cell Trait 
An inherited disorder of red blood cells with only mild anemia. (See Sickle Cell Anemia.) 

Silent Carriers 
When both parents carry defective, recessive genes (genes determine hereditary characteristics). 

Spasm 
An abnormal and uncontrollable contraction of a muscle. A spasm is a cramp. 

Spinal injury 
Where the spine and sometimes the spinal cord are damaged. Spinal injury may result in muscle weakness and paralysis. 

Spine 
A column of bones and cartilage in the back which begin at the base of the skull and continue to the pelvis. 

Sterilization 
Any procedure by which an individual is made incapable of reproduction; the elimination of microorganisms. 

Stethoscope 
An instrument used to listen to sounds in the body such as those made by the lungs and heart. 

Stomach 
Located in the upper part of the abdomen and in front the pancreas, the stomach is a saclike organ that connects from the esophagus to the small intestine. The stomach stores and assists in the breakdown of food. 

Strep Throat 
One of the diseases caused by the streptococcal bacteria. Generally, symptoms include a sore throat, fever, swollen glands, and general body aches. Strep Throat is treated with antibiotics. 

Streptococcal Bacteria 
The most common disease-causing bacteria in humans which can be treated with antibiotics. If left untreated, some types of streptococcal bacteria may give rise to more serious diseases. 

Swollen Glands 
Enlarged lymph nodes usually due to an infection or allergic reaction. Common sites where glands can be felt are in the neck, armpit, and groin. 

Syphilis 
A sexually transmitted disease caused by bacteria which invade the blood through broken tissue linings in the sex organs, rectum, or mouth. It can be treated with antibiotics. 

Tay-Sachs Disease 
An inherited brain disorder which results in early death. 

Testes 
Male organs located in the scrotum which produce sperm. 

Tetanus 
A serious disease affecting the central nervous system. Tetanus (lockjaw) results when a wound is infected with a type of bacteria that thrives without oxygen (particularly in deep wounds). It is a rare disease in the United States today. 

Tetanus-Diphtheria Booster 
A follow-up dose of a vaccine for Tetanus and Diphtheria. 

Thalassemia 
Inherited disorder in which there is a problem with hemoglobin (the agent that transfers oxygen to red blood cells) production. 

Toxemia 
(Preeclampsia) A condition in which high blood pressure and fluid retention occur late in pregnancy. 

Tranquilizers 
Drugs that are sedatives. 

Trimester 
A term used to define a period of three months. In pregnancy, the first trimester is 1-12 weeks; the second trimester is 13-26 weeks, and the third or last trimester is 27- delivery. 

Tuberculin Skin Test 
A test, whereby a small dose of a purified form of the tuberculosis bacteria is injected into the skin of the forearm, to determine if a person has previously been exposed to tuberculosis. 

Tubules 
The tubes of the kidney involved in the reabsorption of fluid and other essential substances such as amino acids, sugar, and calcium. 

Tumor 
A location where cells in the body multiply at an increased rate. Some tumors are benign (not cancerous), others are malignant (cancerous). 

Ultrasound 
(Sonogram) A diagnostic instrument that uses sound waves which reflect off the fetus and are transformed into an image on a TV-type monitor. 

Umbilical Cord 
The fibrous cord-like structure containing two arteries and a vein and connecting the fetus to the placenta. Oxygen and nutrients from the mother's circulation pass through the umbilical cord to the fetus. 

Uterine Borders 
The edges of the uterus, felt through the woman's abdomen. 

Uterus 
Muscular organ inside which the baby grows during pregnancy. Also called womb. 

Vaccine 
An immunization performed primarily by needle injection which creates antibodies to fight a particular virus. 

Vacuum Extractor 
An instrument which aids in the delivery of a baby. A suction cup is placed on the baby's head and the vacuum is turned on drawing the baby's head into the cup. The baby is then gently pulled through the vagina during contractions. 

Vagina 
The birth canal. It is approximately 4-6 inches long and extends from the uterus to the vulva or opening of the vagina. 

Vaginal Delivery 
Birth of a baby through the vagina. 

Vaginal Discharge 
Flow of fluid from the vagina. 

Vaginal Spotting 
A slight bloody discharge from the vagina. 

Vaporizer 
A machine that adds moisture to the air to prevent dryness in the mouth, nose, and throat. Vaporizers typically put out hot steam. 

Varicose Veins 
Veins that are twisted and swollen just below the skin. Veins carry blood back to the heart. 

Vernix Caseosa 
A white, cheese-like substance that covers and protects a newborn's skin. 

Viral Infection 
An infection involving viruses, the smallest known disease causing organism. Viruses can be harmless (e.g. warts) or devastating (e.g. the AIDS virus). 

Wheezing 
A whistling noise in the chest which occurs during breathing when the airways are compressed. 

Womb 
The common term for uterus, a muscular organ inside which the baby grows during pregnancy. 

Yeast Infection 
An infection of the skin or tissue linings caused by fungi. A vaginal yeast infection can be treated by over-the-counter medication. It does not pose any danger to a pregnant woman or her fetus. 